README.md, before:

# prisma-template

This example shows how to implement an **GraphQL server (SDL-first) with TypeScript** based on [Prisma Client](https://www.prisma.io/docs/reference/tools-and-interfaces/prisma-client/api), [graphql-yoga](https://github.com/prisma/graphql-yoga) and [graphql-tools](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphql-tools/). It is based on a SQLite database, you can find the database file with some dummy data at [`./prisma/dev.db`](./prisma/dev.db).

## How to use

### 1. Download example & install dependencies

Click on use template

Install npm dependencies:

```
cd prisma-template
npm install
```

Note that this also generates Prisma Client JS into `node_modules/@prisma/client` via a `postinstall` hook of the `@prisma/client` package from your `package.json`.

### 2. Start the GraphQL server

Launch your GraphQL server with this command:

```
yarn start
```

Navigate to [http://localhost:4000](http://localhost:4000) in your browser to explore the API of your GraphQL server in a [GraphQL Playground](https://github.com/prisma/graphql-playground).

## Using the GraphQL API

The schema that specifies the API operations of your GraphQL server is defined in [`./src/schema/schema.graphql`](./src/schema/schema.graphql). Below are a number of operations that you can send to the API using the GraphQL Playground.

Feel free to adjust any operation by adding or removing fields. The GraphQL Playground helps you with its auto-completion and query validation features.

### Retrieve all published posts and their authors

```graphql
query {
  feed {
    id
    title
    content
    published
    author {
      id
      name
      email
    }
  }
}
```

<Details><Summary><strong>See more API operations</strong></Summary>

### Create a new user

```graphql
mutation {
  signupUser(data: { name: "Sarah", email: "sarah@prisma.io" }) {
    id
  }
}
```

### Create a new draft

```graphql
mutation {
  createDraft(
    title: "Join the Prisma Slack"
    content: "https://slack.prisma.io"
    authorEmail: "alice@prisma.io"
  ) {
    id
    published
  }
}
```

### Publish an existing draft

```graphql
mutation {
  publish(id: __POST_ID__) {
    id
    published
  }
}
```

> **Note**: You need to replace the `__POST_ID__`-placeholder with an actual `id` from a `Post` item. You can find one e.g. using the `filterPosts`-query.

### Search for posts with a specific title or content

```graphql
{
  filterPosts(searchString: "graphql") {
    id
    title
    content
    published
    author {
      id
      name
      email
    }
  }
}
```

### Retrieve a single post

```graphql
{
  post(where: { id: __POST_ID__ }) {
    id
    title
    content
    published
    author {
      id
      name
      email
    }
  }
}
```

> **Note**: You need to replace the `__POST_ID__`-placeholder with an actual `id` from a `Post` item. You can find one e.g. using the `filterPosts`-query.

### Delete a post

```graphql
mutation {
  deleteOnePost(where: { id: __POST_ID__ }) {
    id
  }
}
```

> **Note**: You need to replace the `__POST_ID__`-placeholder with an actual `id` from a `Post` item. You can find one e.g. using the `filterPosts`-query.

</Details>

## Evolving the app

Evolving the application typically requires four subsequent steps:

1. Migrating the database schema using Prisma Migrate
1. Generating Prisma Client to match the new database schema with `prisma generate`
1. Use the updated Prisma Client in your application code

For the following example scenario, assume you want to add a "profile" feature to the app where users can create a profile and write a short bio about themselves.

### 1. Change your database schema using SQL

The first step would be to add a new model, e.g. called `Profile`, to the prisma schema. You can do so by adding the following:

```prisma
model Profile {
  id     Int    @id @default(autoincrement())
  bio    String
  user   User?  @relation(fields: [userId], references: [id])
  userId Int?
}
```

To generate the migration against the database, you can use the migrate script in your terminal & it will also run the prisma generate step for you, e.g.:

```bash
yarn migrate
```

Note that we're adding a unique constraint to the foreign key on `user`, this means we're expressing a 1:1 relationship between `User` and `Profile`, i.e.: "one user has one profile".

Your database & the Prisma Client are now aware of the new table, you should able to perform any operations to the `Profile` table using Prisma Client.

#### Create a new profile for an existing user

```ts
const profile = await prisma.profile.create({
  data: {
    bio: 'Hello World',
    user: {
      connect: { email: 'alice@prisma.io' },
    },
  },
})
```

#### Create a new user with a new profile

```ts
const user = await prisma.user.create({
  data: {
    email: 'john@prisma.io',
    name: 'John',
    profile: {
      create: {
        bio: 'Hello World',
      },
    },
  },
})
```

#### Update the profile of an existing user

```ts
const userWithUpdatedProfile = await prisma.user.update({
  where: { email: 'alice@prisma.io' },
  data: {
    profile: {
      update: {
        bio: 'Hello Friends',
      },
    },
  },
})
```

Commit message:

feat(ci): configure mysql in release workflow
- switch prisma datasource from sqlite to mysql
- update github action workflow to start mysql and create test db
- update github action workflow to run migrations before running tests

README.md, after:

# prisma-template

This example shows how to implement an **GraphQL server (SDL-first) with TypeScript** based on [Prisma Client](https://www.prisma.io/docs/reference/tools-and-interfaces/prisma-client/api), [graphql-yoga](https://github.com/prisma/graphql-yoga) and [graphql-tools](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphql-tools/). It is based on a SQLite database, you can find the database file with some dummy data at [`./prisma/dev.db`](./prisma/dev.db).

## How to use

### 1. Download example & install dependencies

Click on use template

Install npm dependencies:

```
cd prisma-template
npm install
```

Note that this also generates Prisma Client JS into `node_modules/@prisma/client` via a `postinstall` hook of the `@prisma/client` package from your `package.json`.

### 2. Setting Database Credentials

Create a .env file in the root of the project containing your database credentials

```
DATABASE_URL="mysql://root:root@localhost:3306/test"
```

### 3. Start the GraphQL server

Launch your GraphQL server with this command:

```
yarn start
```

Navigate to [http://localhost:4000](http://localhost:4000) in your browser to explore the API of your GraphQL server in a [GraphQL Playground](https://github.com/prisma/graphql-playground).

## Using the GraphQL API

The schema that specifies the API operations of your GraphQL server is defined in [`./src/schema/schema.graphql`](./src/schema/schema.graphql). Below are a number of operations that you can send to the API using the GraphQL Playground.

Feel free to adjust any operation by adding or removing fields. The GraphQL Playground helps you with its auto-completion and query validation features.

### Retrieve all published posts and their authors

```graphql
query {
  feed {
    id
    title
    content
    published
    author {
      id
      name
      email
    }
  }
}
```

<Details><Summary><strong>See more API operations</strong></Summary>

### Create a new user

```graphql
mutation {
  signupUser(data: { name: "Sarah", email: "sarah@prisma.io" }) {
    id
  }
}
```

### Create a new draft

```graphql
mutation {
  createDraft(
    title: "Join the Prisma Slack"
    content: "https://slack.prisma.io"
    authorEmail: "alice@prisma.io"
  ) {
    id
    published
  }
}
```

### Publish an existing draft

```graphql
mutation {
  publish(id: __POST_ID__) {
    id
    published
  }
}
```

> **Note**: You need to replace the `__POST_ID__`-placeholder with an actual `id` from a `Post` item. You can find one e.g. using the `filterPosts`-query.

### Search for posts with a specific title or content

```graphql
{
  filterPosts(searchString: "graphql") {
    id
    title
    content
    published
    author {
      id
      name
      email
    }
  }
}
```

### Retrieve a single post

```graphql
{
  post(where: { id: __POST_ID__ }) {
    id
    title
    content
    published
    author {
      id
      name
      email
    }
  }
}
```

> **Note**: You need to replace the `__POST_ID__`-placeholder with an actual `id` from a `Post` item. You can find one e.g. using the `filterPosts`-query.

### Delete a post

```graphql
mutation {
  deleteOnePost(where: { id: __POST_ID__ }) {
    id
  }
}
```

> **Note**: You need to replace the `__POST_ID__`-placeholder with an actual `id` from a `Post` item. You can find one e.g. using the `filterPosts`-query.

</Details>

## Evolving the app

Evolving the application typically requires four subsequent steps:

1. Migrating the database schema using Prisma Migrate
1. Generating Prisma Client to match the new database schema with `prisma generate`
1. Use the updated Prisma Client in your application code

For the following example scenario, assume you want to add a "profile" feature to the app where users can create a profile and write a short bio about themselves.

### 1. Change your database schema using SQL

The first step would be to add a new model, e.g. called `Profile`, to the prisma schema. You can do so by adding the following:

```prisma
model Profile {
  id     Int    @id @default(autoincrement())
  bio    String
  user   User?  @relation(fields: [userId], references: [id])
  userId Int?
}
```

To generate the migration against the database, you can use the migrate script in your terminal & it will also run the prisma generate step for you, e.g.:

```bash
yarn migrate
```

Note that we're adding a unique constraint to the foreign key on `user`, this means we're expressing a 1:1 relationship between `User` and `Profile`, i.e.: "one user has one profile".

Your database & the Prisma Client are now aware of the new table, you should able to perform any operations to the `Profile` table using Prisma Client.

#### Create a new profile for an existing user

```ts
const profile = await prisma.profile.create({
  data: {
    bio: 'Hello World',
    user: {
      connect: { email: 'alice@prisma.io' },
    },
  },
})
```

#### Create a new user with a new profile

```ts
const user = await prisma.user.create({
  data: {
    email: 'john@prisma.io',
    name: 'John',
    profile: {
      create: {
        bio: 'Hello World',
      },
    },
  },
})
```

#### Update the profile of an existing user

```ts
const userWithUpdatedProfile = await prisma.user.update({
  where: { email: 'alice@prisma.io' },
  data: {
    profile: {
      update: {
        bio: 'Hello Friends',
      },
    },
  },
})
```
